= RobustExcelOle

== Saving and closing workbooks

=== Saving a workbook.

Imagine, you have opened a workbook with

  workbook = Workbook.open('spec/data/workbook.xls', visible: true)

and have modified it.

You can save the workbook by

  workbook.save

If you want to save a workbook with a file name, then use

  workbook.save_as('new_workbook.xls')

The options and respective valid values are the following:

+:if_exists+:: +:raise+ (default), +:overwrite+, +:alert+
+:if_obstruced+:: +:raise (default), +:forget+, +:save+, +close_if_saved

The option +:if_exists+ :

If a workbook with the file name already exists, then

+:raise+::     Raise an exeption. Don't write the file.
+:overwrite+:: Delete the existing file and write the file. If the workbook is open in an Excel instance, then raise an exception.
+:alert+::     Give the control to Excel.
  
For example, you want to save a workbook and overwrite the file if it exists before, then use

  workbook.save_as('another_workbook.xls', if_exists: :overwrite) 

If a workbook blocks the workbook that should be saved, then the former one can be saved and closed before.

  workbook = Workbook.open('spec/data/workbook.xls')
  workbook2 = Workbook.open('spec/data/another_workbook.xls')
  workbook2.save_as('dir/workbook.xls', if_exists: :overwrite, if_obstructed: :save)  

=== Closing a workbook.

You can close the workbook with the command

  workbook.close

There is one option: +:if_unsaved+ . It can have one of the following values:

+:raise+ (default), +:save+, +:forget+, +:alert+

The option specifies: If the workbook is unsaved, then

+:save+::   Save the workbook before closing it.
+:raise+::  Raise an exception. Don't close the workbook.
+:forget+:: Close the workbook. 
+:alert+::  Give control to Excel.

=== Opening, saving and closing a workbook under a certain name

You can open a workbook with given file name.

  workbook = Workbook.open('spec/data/workbook.xls')

You can save a workbook with given file name, if it is open.

  Workbook.save_as('workbook.xls')

The workbook can be saved under a new file name, if it is open.

  Workbook.save_as('spec/data/workbook.xls', 'new_workbook.xls')

Finally the workbook can be closed with a given filename.

  Workbook.close('spec/data/workbook.xls')

== Documentation

Workbook[https://www.rubydoc.info/gems/robust_excel_ole/RobustExcelOle/Workbook]
