= RobustExcelOle

== Creating, using and closing Excel instances

RobustExcelOle enables simultanously running Excel instances. An Excel application is represented by an Excel object.

=== Creating and reusing an Excel instance.

You can create a new Excel instance by

  excel1 = Excel.create

or 

  excel1 = Excel.new(:reuse => false)  

In case you want to reuse an already running Excel instance, write

  excel2 = Excel.current

or 

  excel2 = Excel.new(:reuse => true)  

Options of the methods +create+ and +new+ are +:reuse+ (+true+, +false+), +:visible+ (+true+, +false+), +:displayalerts+ (+true+, +false+, +:if_visible+), +:calculation+ (+:manual+, +:automatic+, +nil+) and +:screenupdating+ (+true+, +false+).

The option +:calculation+ specifies, whether the calculation mode is being forced to be manual (:manual), automatic (+:automatic+) or is not being forced (+nil+).

You can also promote an Excel instance represented as WIN32OLE object to an Excel object.

  excel = Excel.new(win32ole_object, :visible => true)

Once you have got an Excel object, you can apply all VBA methods that you would apply to a VBA Application object
(see https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/office/vba/api/excel.application(object)#methods).
For some common and complex tasks you can use the methods of RobustExcelOle. 

=== Setting options

You can set all options in a given Excel instance

  excel = Excel.current

  excel.for_this_instance(:visible => true, :displayalerts => true, :calculation => :manual)

=== Making an Excel visible or invisible

You can create a new Excel instance and make it visible.

  excel1 = Excel.create(:visible => true)

or

  excel1 = Excel.new(:reuse => false, :visible => true)  

or 

  excel1 = Excel.create
  excel1.visible = true  


=== Enabling or disabling DisplayAlerts

You can enable DisplayAlerts with, e.g. 

  excel1 = Excel.new(:reuse => true, :displayalerts => true)

or 

  excel1 = Excel.current
  excel1.displayalerts = true

and turn DisplayAlerts off with

  excel1.displayalerts = false

You can turn DisplayAlerts off or on within a block.

  excel.with_displayalerts false do
    # do something
  end

Notice, that when the Excel instance is set to visible, its DisplayAlerts is set to true by default, if DisplayAlerts is not explicitely set to false.

=== Setting Calculation mode

You can set the calculation mode of an Excel instance to manual or automatic.

  excel.calculation = :manual

You can do it in a block:

  excel = Excel.create
  book = Workbook.open('spec/data/workbook.xls')
  excel.with_calculation(:manual) do 
    # do something
  end

=== Setting options for all workbooks

You can set options for all workbooks of an Excel instance.

  excel.for_all_workooks(:visible => true, :read_only => true)


=== Showing and traversing through all workbooks

You can yield an array of all Workbook objects of an Excel instance.

  excel.workbooks

You can access all Workbook objects by using the methods Excel#each_workbook and Excel#each_workbook_with_index. Here are some examples:
  
  excel.each_workook {|w| puts w.filename}

and

  excel.each_workbook.with_index {|w,i| puts w,i }

With help of these methods you can also supply options, e.g. without a block,

  excel.each_workbook(:visible => true) 

or, with a block,

  excel.each_workbook(:visible => true) {|w| puts w}

=== Bringing an Excel instance to the foreground

  excel1.focus

=== Closing an Excel

  excel = Excel.current
  excel.close

The method +close has the option +:if_unsaved+ with the values +:raise+, +:save+, +:forget+ and +:alert+.

For example, if you want to close an Excel instance and save unsaved workbooks, use

  excel.close(:if_unsaved => :save)

=== Recreating an Excel instance    

Closed Excel instances can also be reopened. This includes reopening all workbooks that were open in that Excel instance.

  excel.close
  excel.recreate

The options are :reopen_workbooks, :visible and :displayalerts.

  excel.recreate(:reopen_workbooks => true, :visible => true, :displayalerts => true)

=== Providing Excel instances

Providing all Excel instances (opened via RobustExcelOle) as objects of the class Excel

  Excel.excel_processes 

=== Closing all Excel instances

  Excel.close_all

This method has the option +:if_unsaved+ as described above. For example, if you want to close all Excel instances containing saved workbooks and raise an error for Excel instances with unsaved workbooks, use

  Excel.close_all(:if_unsaved => :raise)   

=== Terminating all Excel processes

  Excel.kill_all

This method kills all Excel instances no matter whether they contain unsaved workbooks.  

== Code

excel.rb[https://github.com/Thomas008/robust_excel_ole/blob/master/lib/robust_excel_ole/excel.rb]
